---
layout: posts
title:  "DIGC-3600 Unit Four Analysis: The Dilemma between privacy & justice"
date:   2025-07-07 15:30:0
categories: DIGC-3600
---


“What are our ethical responsibilities as consumer-citizens in using (digital) technologies?” – When I read this question and think about my previous postings regarding the pseudo-anonymous app “Yik Yak”, I immediately think of my various attempts to deconstruct the social media platform. 

I am not one who uses social media on a daily basis, at least compared to most people using social media. When a friend of my partner came to me upset that people were saying mean things about them on the app because of their loud laugh, I knew it would be a good challenge to see if I could deconstruct the app and identify the culprits. "Sophisticated social media surveillance tools" (Shahbaz & Funk) have existed for many years now, and are increasingly becoming more available to people with common knowledge of how social media platforms work. Think OSINT / Open-Source Intelligence: "Collecting, evaluating and analyzing publicly available information with the purpose of answering a specific intelligence question." (Gill)

Over time, since I was only viewing the public, but very controversial posts made by crude people, the algorithm that the app uses noticed this. In Unit 4.2 of DIGC 3600 from the University of Pennsylvania, it is mentioned that “you’ll see a list that’s in some fashion curated “for you” – that’s been established using an algorithm.” (Krieger). This directly happened to me because I only looked at the most controversial posts. Ones which generated or rather caused an emotional reaction towards other students. We as people react most strongly towards things of a controversial nature, content that divides us.

You’d see people calling others slurs and other crude topics similar to this. These students are affected by a "toxic disinhibition effect" (Suler) which means to feels less restrained in expressing themselves negatively towards others over the internet. Eg. taking photos of other students without their knowledge and making fun of them. These are people creating endless conflict which is what makes it truly disappointing and motivated me even more to put a stop to it.

Although to me, it seemed like it was my responsibility to identify these students and report their actions, I knew that my own actions are considered an invasion of their "reasonable expectation to privacy" (Dummit Fradin). Had I reported this to faculty or college leadership, it is likely I would have also received punishment, though from law enforcement and not the college. By technicality, I had broken the law in my biased pursuit of justice. By invading their privacy via intruding into both Yik Yak's private app interface as well as the tracking of the users' "private communications" (Dummit Fradin), I had been able to roughly identify who made what post and when. This is not something I should have done to that extent.

Yik Yak, being a pseudo anonymous space, has its vulnerabilities and its benefits. You get the campus drama, the news, but the bad outweighs the good by a wide margin. Me personally? I would leave it at the door.


Works Cited

Bayne, Sian, et al. “The Social Value of Anonymity on Campus: A Study of the Decline of Yik Yak.” Learning, Media and Technology, vol. 44, no. 2, Apr. 2019, pp. 92–107. DOI.org (Crossref), https://doi.org/10.1080/17439884.2019.1583672.

Dennis, Dannah. “Yik Yak on Campus: Navigating Identity and Violence through Hyperlocal Anonymity.” MediaWell, Social Science Research Council, 1 Nov. 2023, https://just-tech.ssrc.org/articles/yik-yak-on-campus-navigating-identity-and-violence-through-hyperlocal-anonymity/.

Reasonable Expectation of Privacy and 4th Amendment Rights. 30 Aug. 2024, https://www.dummitfradin.com/a-reasonable-expectation-of-privacy/.

“Social Media Surveillance.” Freedom House, https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-on-the-net/2019/the-crisis-of-social-media/social-media-surveillance. Accessed 3 Jul. 2025.

Suler, John. “The Online Disinhibition Effect.” CyberPsychology & Behavior, vol. 7, no. 3, Jun. 2004, pp. 321–26. DOI.org (Crossref), https://doi.org/10.1089/1094931041291295.

What Is OSINT (Open-Source Intelligence?) | SANS Institute. https://www.sans.org/blog/what-is-open-source-intelligence/. Accessed 10 Jul. 2025.
